# Things to Know

* in paths, `.` will be replaced with the current directory
* programs can *only* be written in designated directories

## Palette Conventions
There are no set colors that you must have, but these are the color conventions.
* `00` - black, the void surrounding the terminal
* `01` - blue, the top bar background color
* `02` - green, text color, as well as selected text and option background color
* `03` - cyan
* `04` - red
* `05` - magenta, translation error color text background
* `06` - orange/brown
* `07` - light grey
* `08` - dark grey
* `09` - light blue
* `10` - light green
* `11` - light cyan
* `12` - light red, error background color
* `13` - light magenta
* `14` - light orange/yellow
* `15` - white, the terminal background color, top bar and error text color, and the selected text and option color

Note: colors `00`, `01`, `02`, `05`, `12`, and `15` are tied to their specific UI elements and this **cannot** be changed (yet). Some palettes are hardcoded to changes these values around. This will able to be done by the user via palette files in future versions.

### Current Color Palettes
* standard
* revised
* cherry
* swamp
* swamp-revised
* neon

## Aliases

* changelanguage -> lang
* clear -> cl
* clearstate -> cls
* croak -> c
* formattime -> ft
* hatch -> ch
* help -> ?
* hop -> h
* list -> ls
* listdrives -> ld
* loadstate -> lds
* macro -> /
* meta -> m
* metaprop -> mp
* opendocumentation -> docs
* savestate -> svs
* spawn -> s
* swimto -> st

## Translating froggyOS into Different Languages
- The `TRANSLATION_MAP` file in the `Settings:/lang_files` directory is what holds the indexes for translation. **Do not edit this file unless you deliberately want to mess up froggyOS. (You can't even edit this file through the OS)**
- Languages file names are 3 letter abbreviations of the language name.
- To add a new language, copy the `lbh`, or `language build helper` file, which contains **translation descriptors** (prefixed with `T_`), which give you an idea of what the original meaning of the text is.
- Set the language to `lbh` to see which translation descriptors are used where in froggyOS. If there are missing translation descriptors at the end of a file, the English translation will be used.
- If a language file does not meet requirements (valid name declaration, correct file length), it will be invalid and unable to be used.
- The **name declaration** must be the first line of the file, and must be in the format `{{{LANGNAME_!!!_[language name]}}}`. For example, the name declaration for the `eng` file is `{{{LANGNAME_!!!_English}}}`.
- If the default language is invalid, froggyOS will automatically revert to the `lbh` language file.
- If a supposedly translated text results in `Index Missing!`, this means that you ROYALLY screwed something up. This can only happen if you edit the `TRANSLATION_MAP` file. If you manage to trigger this error without editing this file through the dev console, please email what you did to `froggyos.royal.screw.up@gmail.com` so I can replicate it. This type of error will also screw up other translations, it is very noticiable.
- If language files are hidden, they will still be able to be used as a language file, they will just not show up in the list of available languages.

## Command Help
### formattime
The all instances of the following characters (or character sequences) will be replaced with their respective values. Place a `!` before the character to escape it.
#### Date
* weekday
    * `w` - short weekday (Mon, Tues)
    * `W` - long weekday (Monday, Tuesday)
* `y` - year
* month
    * `mn` - month number (01, 02)
    * `mnu` - month number unpadded (1, 2)
    * `ms` - month short (Jan, Feb)
    * `M` - month long (January, February)
* day
    * `d` - day (01, 02)
    * `du` - day unpadded (1, 2)
    * `D` - ordinal day (1st, 2nd)

#### Time
* hour
    * `h` - 24 hour (00, 01, ... 22, 23)
    * `hu` - 24 hour unpadded (0, 1, ... 22, 23)
    * `H` - 12 hour (01, 02, ... 11, 12)
    * `Hu` - 12 hour unpadded (1, 2, ... 11, 12)
* minute
    * `m` - minute (00, 01)
    * `mu` - minute unpadded (0, 1)
* second
    * `s` - second (00, 01)
    * `su` - second unpadded (0, 1)
* `a` - AM/PM
* `z` - timezone

### hop
* `hop ~` will take you to the root directory of the current drive
* `hop -` will take you to the previous directory

### metaprop
Properties:
* read - If this file can be read. This includes being able to run the program or list file contents with the `spy` command.
* write - If this file can be written to. This includes being able to edit the file or delete it.
* hidden - If this file is hidden. This will *not* prevent you from editing the file.

## Macros
* Macros are written in the `D:/Macros` directory
* each line in a macro file is a command that will be executed
* to add an alias to a macro, the **first** line must be `![alias]`. You can add only one alias per macro.
* to use file arguments inside of a macro, use `$[file argument number]`

## Settings Directory
If you edit the `Settings:` drive directly, some settings won't apply until you reload the froggyOS state. An easy way to do this would be to run the `reload` macro.

## Bugs
### Known
* There's some weird stuff going on with `append`. Fix later.
* something with `outc`? idk
* `str` variables dont require quotes. make them required
* the loading spinner goes ZOOMING????
### Fixed
* the first line of the macro was not being read
    * because it was assumed the first line was defining the alias, it was just discarded
* cannot call functions inside of functions. This is because functions are parsed by the formatter instead of the parser. This is because it was easier to do than implementing an isolated parser that has the variables from the other, parent parser
    * functions are now referenced by line numbers
* something with `if` statements???? check it out later
    * `if` keywords work correctly now, but `else` might not work as expected.
* load state doesnt work with palettes
* the inserted `wait` keywords may be messing loops sometimes
    * `wait` keywords were being inserted before every `endloop` command, which stacked. Turns out the `wait` keyword was not necessary, so it was removed.
        * they were VERY much needed lmfao, but instead of them being automatically put in, the user has to do it manually, if it isnt done, there is a rare error message and froggyOS is reloaded

# FroggyScript Documentation
**Note: spaces are part of syntax, and must be used as shown**

Operators:
* All JavaScript operators are valid

## General Utilities
### End the Program
If this isn't called anywhere, once execution reaches the end of the file, froggyOS **will** brick itself. I could make it *not* do that, but that would be boring.
```
endprog
```
### Comments
```
you can just write if it doesnt start with a keyword
-- or you can (and are recommended to) use the comment keyword just to be safe
```
### Wait
```
wait [time in milliseconds]

wait 1000
wait v:number
```
### Clear Screen
```
clearterminal
```
### Change Color Palette
```
changepalette [palette name]

changepalette standard
changepalette cherry
```

## Output
### Output
```
out [input]

out v:variable_name
out "text"
out "text with spaces"
out 'more text'
out "i can put a v:variable inside a string"
```
### Formatted Output
#### General
* index `0` is the 1st character.
* You can  use variables as values for color codes, variables of length 2 or less will be converted to color codes automatically.
* There is very little error checking on the formatting objects, so make sure they're correct.
* The whitespace inside of the formatting object does not matter.
```
outc [format] [text]

outc {t=c01} "this is blue text"
outc {b=c00} "this is a black background"
outc {t=c02, b=c01} "this is green green text on a blue background"
outc {t=c02, tr=0-15} "from the 1st to 16th character, the text will be blue" 
outc {t=c02, tr=4-26 | b=c04, br=57-71} "from the 5th to 29th character, the text will be blue. AND from the 58th to the 72nd character the background will be red" 
```
#### Format Object
* `{}` is a formatting object
* you can set a subrule using this general format: `{[property]=[value]}`
* valid properties:
    * `t` - text color
    * `b` - background color
    * `i` - italic
    * `tr` - text color range
    * `br` - background color range
    * `ir` - italic range
* you can set multiple subrules by separating them with commas: `{[property]=[value],[property]=[value]}`
* to set different ranges, separate subrules with a `|`: `{[property]=[value] | [property]=[value]}`
    * If a range is not specified, the subrule will apply to the entire string
    * The value for Italic is `1` to be enabled, and `0` to be disabled
 
## Variables
### Create a Variable

```
str [variable_name] = [value]
int [variable_name] = [value]

str test = 'single'
str test = "double"
str test = "multiple words"

int age = 20
str output = "i am v:age years old"
```
### Edit a Variable
```
set [variable_name] = [value]

set test = 5
set test = 'text'
set test = "many word"
set i = v:i + 1
```

### Delete a Variable
```
free v:[variable_name]

free v:test
```
## String Manipulation
### Append
```
append [variable] [value]

append test ing
append test ing the append keyword
append test ' ing it some more'
append test "AND MORE"
append test v:variable
```
## User Input
### Define a File Argument
```
filearg [variable_name] [type]
filearg name str
filearg age int
out "hello I am v:name and I am v:age years old"

-- when running the program
C:/Home> st [program_name] [arg1] [arg2]
C:/Home> st about_froggy froggy 7
> hello I am froggy and I am 7 years old
```
### Typeable User Input
```
ask [variable]

ask name

-- example usage
str name = ''
out "What is your name?"
ask name
out 'Hello v:name.'
endprog

-- when running the program
C:/Home> st [program_name]
> What is your name?
? Froggy
> Hello Froggy.
```
### User Input with Navigable Options
```
prompt [default highlighted option] [variable] [...options]

prompt 0 output 0 1 2 3
prompt highlightedOption outputVariable the_options cannot_have spaces_in them
```
## Functions
### Create a Function
```
func [func_name]
    [code]
endfunc

func name
    out "hello"
endfunc
```
### Call a Function
```
f: [func_name]

f: name
```

## Control Flow
### If Statement
```
if {[condition]}
    [code]
endif

if {v:variable_name == "value"}
    set variable_name = 'new value'
endif

if {6 < 7} 
    f: name
endif

if {[condition]}
    [if true]
else
    [if false]
endif

if {v:variable_name == 4}
    f: something
else
    f: somethingElse
endif
```

### Loop
**NOTE: you may need to include `wait 0` before endloop keywords**
```
loop {[condition]}
    [code]
endloop

loop {v:i < 5}
    out v:i
    set i = v:i + 1
endloop

int i = 0
int j = 0
loop { v:i < 5 }
    loop { v:j < 4 }
        out v:i * v:j
        set j = v:j + 1
    endloop
    set i = v:i + 1
    set j = 0
endloop
```
## Program Data
### Saving Data
Saves the contents of `[variable]` to the corresponding file in the `D:/Program-Data` file
```
savedata [variable]
```
### Loading Data
From the corresponding `D:/Program-Data` file, loads the contents of entry of `[variable]` to the variable called `[variable]`
```
loaddata [variable]
```